<h1> How Have Irish Online Media Portrayed Ukrainian Refugees in the Years 2022–2025? </h1>
<h2> Project Description </h2>
<p>Since February 2022, over 120,000 Ukrainians have crossed the Irish border as Beneficiaries of Temporary Protection. Despite the scale of this migration, the role of Irish online media in shaping public perceptions of Ukrainian Refugees has remained largely unexplored. This project investigates how the leading news outlets have contributed to the social construction through analysing articles shared on X (formerly Twitter). Using X as a data source, a dataset was collected and subsequently analysed utilising methods of Natural Language Processing to identify patterns in language and sentiment. The computational approach was complemented by Critical Discourse Analysis, which provided a sociological framework for better understanding the narratives. The project aims to explore how media discourse may reflect or reinforce forms of racism, including anti-Slavic racism, and potential anti-refugee sentiments in the specific context of Ukrainian refugees in Ireland. It also considers how these narratives may intersect with broader socio-economic pressures, such as the cost of living crisis, or the housing crisis.</p>
<h2> Methodology </h2>
<h3> Approach </h3>
<p> The project uses both qualitative and quantitative methods to ensure that the information can be acurately analysed, and that meaningful findings can be derived from the analysis process. Natural Language Processing methods involved include BERTopic Topic Distribution, and VADER Sentiment Analysis. Data was analysed using Python with pandas libraries and matplotlib. The dataset was pre-cleaned before running NLP, in order to remove the url noise included within <i>Tweet Content</i>. The embedding model used was all-mpnet-base-v2.</p>
<h3> Data Collection </h3>
<p> The data consists of posts published on X (formerly Twitter) by 5 of the most popular Irish newspapers with the highest readership and following, which include: Irish Examiner (centrist), RTÉ News (liberal), Irish Times (liberal), Irish Independent (conservative), and The Journal (liberal). As the purpose of the project was to analyse the general depiction of Ukrainian refugees in the Irish online media, the readership and the newspaper's popularity were the deciding factor for the inclusion in the dataset, rather than the newspaper's political leaning or reputation.

The posts included in the dataset were selected using keyword-based filtering (containing words ‘Ukraine’, ‘Ukrainian’, or ‘Ukrainians’). All posts included in were made between February 24th and March 24th, 2022-2025.</p>
<p>Despite using X as a data source, the project does not focus on User Generated Content, and does not implement the methods for analysis tailored for Social Media posts. Reasons for selecting X as a data source included the growing relevance of social media as a source of news, as opposed to traditional press, and an assumption that there’s a certain body of social media users who engage with news mostly through interactions with headlines, excerpts, or short summaries, instead of reading full articles, which oftentimes remain inaccessible due to paywalls.</p>
<p> As I had no access to the X Academic API, the posts were collected using the <a href='https://help.rovver.net/'> 
Rovver</a> Chrome Extension. The extension automatically exported the viewed posts into a .csv file with the following properties: Tweet Link, Author Handle, Tweet Content, Views, Likes, Retweets, Replies, Tweet Creation Date, Scraped Date. </p>
<p> As X implemented anti-scraping measures, it has imposed limitations regarding how many posts users are able to search within a specific timeframe, before the search function stops working, after which the user is required to wait for an unidentified amount of time before it resets. Therefore, the collection of the dataset was a time-consuming task. </p> 
<h4> Dataset</h4>
<p>The original dataset is available <a href='https://github.com/pdobrowolska/fyp/blob/main/fyp_dataset.csv'>here,</a> while the clean version, which consists of <b>3247</b> posts, and excludes any irrelevant sources, dates beyond the selected timeframe, and the Scraped Date column, can be accessed <a href='https://github.com/pdobrowolska/fyp/blob/main/fyp_dataset_clean.csv'>here</a>.</p>
<h2>Findings</h2>
<ul>
<li>The amount of posts regarding Ukraine/Ukrainians in February-March 2022 (2208), was twice the sum of the coverage for all remaining years (1039). </li>
<li>The Irish Examiner and RTÉ News published the most on the topic, suggesting a centrist/left-leaning narrative surrounding the coverage on Ukrainians. </li>
<li>There are spikes in the amount of coverage surrounding international events, such as Ukraine's deal with Saudi Arabia (February 2023) or Zelenskyy's meeting with Donald Trump (February 2025).</li>
<li>Sentiment was mostly negative, but that could be attributed to the war-related coverage, rather than the social attitudes/framing of Ukrainians per se.</li>
<li>In 2025, the most dominant sentiment was positive, possibly reflecting less coverage regarding the war itself.</li>
</ul>
<h2> Visualisations </h2>
<h2> Shortcomings </h2>
<p> Due to the restrictions of X Academic API, the selection of the material was limited. As a result, the project does not capture the public responses, and is limited to a specific, narrow timeline. Additionally, both X posts and news headlines are traditionally short texts, which limits the amount of Natural Language Processing techniques that could be applied for the final analysis to derive meaningful results.</p>
